[Music]
good evening and welcome to a very
special event please welcome the pet of
prize winning author Dr sidhart mukarji
the New York Times had this to say about
sidharth's book of all the Sciences
biology is the most Lawless now we have
become fluent enough in its language not
only to understand what laws there are
but also to draft new ones it is a
familiar narrative with a big difference
thanks to Dr mkg's remarkably clear and
compelling Pros the reader has a
Fighting Chance of arriving at the story
of today's genetic manipulations with an
actual understanding of the immensely
complicated science and the even more
complicated moral
questions the book opened at number one
on the New York Times bestseller list
and sar's last book The Emperor of all
maladies was described by Time Magazine
as one of the most important books of
the last century and we'll also read
from His Brilliant new book The Gene and
intimate history please give them a big
hand a gene is the definition of a gene
is changing um like many things in
science but a gene is a unit of
biological information it passes
information it carries information from
cell to cell and from your parents to
your Offspring um uh one gene need not
specify one
trait um nor is it true that one one
trait can be specified by more than one
gene just to give you two concrete
examples um your eye um is made is a
genetic product it is made by not one
gene there's not one it's not like a
blueprint such that that there's a
widget in your body that says make an
eye but multiple genes interact with
each other to ultimately create this
organ called the eye um and uh so so but
they Supply information they carry
biological information and I talk a
little bit about how that biological
information it gets carried and and why
it gets carried so that's what a gene is
what's a genome a genome is a collection
of all your genes every Gene that you
possess um and I'll give you and its
best visualized as as through a met as
through an analogy or a metaphor um your
genetic code our genetic code is written
in just four alphabets A C T and G um if
it was actually written down uh we have
three billion of those um you have I
have we all have three billion 3 billion
that we inherit from one parent 3
billion that we inherit from another
parent um and if it was actually written
down it would um look if let's say we
published it as a the book it would be
66 full sets of the encyclopedia
britanica okay so that's what the book
would look like so you would be sitting
in this room if you imagine this room as
a library every wall of this room would
be one of those volumes of the
66 um sets of the encyclopedia britanica
and here's what's amazing about it if
you uh were to go pick out volume set 16
Volume 7 page 4 it would read like this
it would read a c t g g c c t g g g c g
g g it would be totally inscrutable to
you and me that's what the code would
look like and yet and here's the kicker
here's what's astonishing that's the in
the entire genome it has all your genes
all the stuff that is between genes the
reg the the sequences that tell genes
when to go on when to shut off when to
turn on and yet out of that in totally
inscrutable actg
ccctg your first your embryonic cell can
build you and me and it can build you
with five fingers and it can build me
with five fingers and yet it can also
build you so that you look like the way
you do and look and I have differences
between you and me um when a change
occurs between one such set and another
such set we call it a
variation um
when a change occurs and that change has
a certain uh biological characteristic
we call it a mutation let's talk about
the double-edge sword the double-edged
sword is that this same technology
allowed us to diagnose braa one and
prevent breast cancer in in a woman
right if we didn't have this kind of
Technology Angelina Julie is one Mega
film star there are tens of thousands of
women around the world who are
benefiting from the fact that they have
been diagnosed um with uh if they choose
to be with uh having a brca1 variation
and they can have prophylactic
treatments which can range from taking a
medicine doing nothing taking a
medicine uh having a prophylactic
mastectomy having a prophylactic wcty
having intensive screening etc etc and
in principle tens of thousands of
invasive breast cancers are and can be
prevented we know this from clinical
trials using this technology there is a
child who I met recently I mean I do
gene therapy I'm a gene therapist
there's a child that um um is living
she's 6 years old and some of you may
have seen the film that I did with Ken
Burns um she was one of the patient
zeroes of um technologies that allow us
to introduce into her immune cells a
gene that specifically recog recognizes
her cancer and thereby arm her immune
cells to be able to Now kill the cancer
and she now is in her six the of
remission uh with a kind of leukemia
that she would have certainly died from
six years ago okay so let's not on let's
not begin by saying that you know let's
just identify what one edge of that
sword is now the second edge of that
sword is the sword that's coming to us
um which is that there are two
technologies that we need to understand
and they're very important that they're
distinctive from each other and we need
to know these uh Technologies number one
particularly for India is prenatal
genetic diagnosis prenatal genetic
diagnosis allows you to essentially take
an embryo or an egg U potentially even
an egg but certainly an embryo biopsy
that embryo you can take one cell out of
the embryo and because of a miraculous
property of of embryos you can pick out
that one one cell and you can
essentially very soon sequence the
entire active Genome of the embryo I'm
saying active genome because there's a
little caveat there we don't need to
worry about it for now right now but you
can sequence about several thousands of
the genes in that incipient embryo you
can have 10 of them and you can decide
to implant five or one or two right so
that's pre-implantation genetic
diagnosis and that allows you to
diagnose uh genetically uh what is in
what is the content the genetic content
of the embryo okay so I will now give
you so that's pre-implantation genetic
diagnosis I'll give you the second one
and we'll come back to the quandaries
the second thing which happened 5 years
ago it's something that we weren't
directly involved in although this is
technology I use every day in the lab
and it's important to understand the
difference again let's go back to the
analogy of these 66 sets of the
encyclopedia britanica
what pre-implantation genetic diagnosis
does is to say I'm going to say I'm
going to take one of these
sets sequence The genome and decide that
this one set works for me and I'm going
to implant that one set as a child in my
in my womb is everyone clear about that
technically clear about that all right 5
years ago we discovered actually
Jennifer DNA Emanuel sharpener two
amazing Fe Fe women scientists and hold
a bunch of colleagues there's a long
history to this it's all in the book um
quite disputed by the way uh uh anyway
found a technology which does something
different which is that now there are
technologies that allow us to take again
that 66 sets of the encyclopedia
Botanica go to Volume 7 in set 16 erase
one word and switch it out for a
different
word that's a different technology
that's called called genetic surgery
it's called genetic this is called
genomic engineering or genetic surgery
and several other words have been used
for it the word that's commonly used
you'll find in the newspaper is called
crisper for a reason that is complicated
doesn't need to be told but it's called
crisper so those are two different kinds
of Technology I'll tell you why they're
different in a fundamental way they're
different because obviously the first
allows us to subtract information from
the human genetic lineage right you can
say I'm going to select this
one embryo and by selecting this one
embryo I'm away from the human genetic
lineage anything else that is not part
of this lineage right so I'm going to
subtract away a child that might have a
brca1 mutation that's a subtractive
quality the second is adding information
to the human embryo right so now you can
erase something even though you're
erasing it you're fundamentally changing
and in fact not only now you can erase
you can actually change the word words
themselves you can go inside change the
word
actg erase it out and switch it to
AG okay so those are the two
technologies we need to be aware of them
one is a subtractive technology one is
an additive technology but the bottom
line is that now the human genome
additive and subtractively has become
manipulable we can now manipulate the
human genome now come the ethical
quanties or some of the moral quantities
let's say I have and this is a question
open to you let's say I will I find that
in pre-implantation genetic diagnosis I
find a gene that causes a
100% chance of having it's a highly
penetrant
mutation causes extraordinary suffering
let's say it causes a terrifying
neurodegenerative disease we know people
like this 100% likelihood that you will
have a terrible NE neurodegenerative
disease you have the chance of
implanting or not implanting that ch
child what would you do not implant not
implant the child some people would
disagree it depends on your personal
conceptions of what you mean what life
is choices Etc some people disagree okay
now let's switch out the paradigms a
little bit now I say there's a 10%
chance of um having a child with a
neurodegenerative disease what would you
do I would still not influ so and now
comes the arena which is becoming going
to be part of your world
what if I said that there was a 20%
child in a societ a deeply repressive
Society of that child having a
particular sexual
orientation what Would You Do Right
implant deeply repressive
Society that's not suffering and that's
the difference that's sexual orientation
your understanding of suffering and my
understanding of suffering is different
and these are questions that are not
going to go away these are questions
that are coming in your direction
tomorrow and and the numbers are going
to be like this the numbers are not
going to be you know 100% chance of
having this 0% chances of having this
they will be probab report cards made
out of probabilities there's that famous
film gataa which some of you may have
watched um even gataka is
becoming old in some ways we are
entering an era of personalized eugenic
management we will enter we have already
entered an era of personalized genomic
management um which is no different in
some moral sense it's not extermination
the comparison to you know to to Nazi
Germany is is a comparison that can only
be made to a certain extent but the
reality of personalized genomic man
management is a reality that is coming
to you and unless you know the
vocabulary unless you know some sense of
what the choices you're willing to make
unless you know understand what your own
sense of suffering is whose suffering is
is your suffering the same as my
suffering is
my uh projected suffering for a child
that I have not yet had the same as my
suffering uh as I feel myself some
people would say yes some people would
say no but um and I vastly prefer the
term sexual orientation because it does
not have uh
the hard categories hard categories also
the values attached to homo hetero blah
blah blah blah blah seems to be so
sexual orentation is a much more I think
it's a neutral term and it it's a
descriptive term um well so what do we
know well we know something's important
we know some important things uh in
terms of uh science what we know we know
number one is that if you have identical
twins um the concordance and by the word
concordance that means that the chances
that they will share the same sexual
orientation is vastly higher than random
chance what does that mean identical
twins have remember identical genomes
they also share identical fetal
environments so um so identical twins
and identical fetal environments have a
vastly higher concordance of having the
same sexual orientation we'll talk about
what those numbers are in a second
fraternal twins who share the same fetal
in micro environment have a much lower
uh concordance of having the same sexual
orientation what does that tell us that
tells us that if you were to take those
two things apart the the genetic
component of it seems to be much
stronger now how strong is it it's on
the order of 40% 50% uh those are the
numbers which would put it several fold
higher than average uh numbers now what
does that tell us that tells us also
that there is clearly a strong
biological basis for sexual orientation
there's no denying it you can't wish
those experiments away those are
experiments that were conducted um the
number is not 100% we don't know why
that number is not 100% uh that may be
because uh again because of uh wide
variations in preference um so that one
person
identifies as homosexual and the other
person does not identify as homosexual
so it's a question of how
self-identify we know that that's a
reasonable hypothesis because most
countries have have had repressive uh uh
atmospheres or ambiances so it's not
difficult to imagine that one person may
will not wish to identify that's one
hypothesis the other hypothesis is that
there is some element of random chance
there is some element there are triggers
uh there's an environmental role maybe
there is a behavioral role which just
don't know the answer but the numbers
are the numbers and they will remain the
numbers for a while unless we have other
studies that dispute or change them so
and that's why I said to you know
we it is obviously my preference and I
think it's the correct preference not to
criminalize
biology um and we should stop
criminalizing biology we actually talk a
little bit about this I'll just
formalize some of it until recently
three unspoken principles have guided
the Arena of genetic diagnosis and
intervention first diagnostic tests have
been restricted to Gene variant that are
singularly highly singularly powerful
determinants of illness that is highly
penetrant mutations we talked of the
idea that if you have the if you have
the mutation if you have the variation
you will have the
illness and so the example of this could
be down syndrome cystic fibrosis or TX
disease second the diseases caused by
these mutations have generally involved
extraordinary suffering or fundamental
incompatibilities with normal life and
third justifiable interventions such as
the decision to abort a child with Down
Syndrome or to intervene surgically on a
woman with brca1 mutation have been
defined through social and medical
consensus and all interventions have
been governed by freedom of choice so
that's the three I call it the triangle
um the justifiable triangle so
extraordinary suffering very penetrate
mutation and a certain freedom of
justifiable Choice um the three sides of
these triangles can be envisioned as
moral lines that most cultures up till
now have been unwilling to transgress
just to give you an example the abortion
of an embryo carrying a gene would say
only a 10% chance of developing cancer
in the future violates the injunction
against intervening on low penetrance
mutations similarly a state mandated
medical procedure on a genetically ill
person without the subject's consent or
or parental consent in the case of a
fetus crosses the boundary of freedom
and
non-coercion everyone here with me yet
it can hardly Escape our attention that
these parameters are inherently
susceptible to the logic of self
self-reinforcement we determine the
definition of extraordinary suffering we
demarcate the boundaries of normaly
versus abnormaly we make the medical
choices to intervene we determine the
nature of what is justifiable and non
justifiable interventions human beings
endowed with certain genomes are
responsible responsible for defining the
criteria to Define intervene or even
eliminate other human beings endowed
with other kinds of
genomes choice in short seems like an
illusion devised by genes to propagate
the selection of similar
genes that's a tough question yeah um
I'll give you an example of this in the
late
1990s a gene called 5htt lrp which was
found to encode a molecule that
modulates signaling between certain
neurons in the brain was found to
associated with a response to psychic
stress the gene comes in two forms or Al
a long variant and a short variant the
short variant is called HT I'll call it
HT short it's carried by about 40% of
the population and seems to produce
significantly lower levels of the
protein this short variant 5hd short has
been repeatedly associated with anxious
Behavior depression trauma alcoholism
and high-risk behaviors the link is not
strong but it's broad the short alil has
been associated with increased suicidal
risk among German alcoholics increased
depression in American college students
and higher rates of PTSD among deployed
soldiers so there are basically two Gene
variants a short variant which causes a
higher level of psychic stress a long
variant that causes a lower level of
psychic stress okay in 2010 a team of
researchers launched a research study
called the strong African-Americans
family project in which uh basically
what happened is that 600 American I'm
skipping ahead a little bit 600
African-American children were uh early
adolescent children were recruited for
their study the families were randomly
assigned to two groups in one group The
Children received and their parents
received 7 weeks of int ensive education
counseling emotional support and
structured social interventions focused
on preventing alcoholism binge behaviors
violence impulsiveness and drug use and
in the control group the families
received no interventions or minimal
interventions and at the same time
children in both these groups had this
Gene sequence this Gene that increases
or decrease the risk of psychic stress
everyone with me so far okay the first
result of this randomized trials was
predictable from prior studies in the
the control group children with this
short variant that is the high risk the
psych psychic risk form of the gene were
twice as likely to Veer towards
high-risk behaviors including binge
drinking drug use and sexual promiscuity
as adolescent confirming earlier studies
that had suggested an increasing risk
within this
subgroup now the second result is much
more provocative because these very
children the ones that are at the
highest risk the ones that have this
high risk variant who are the most
likely to respond to social
interventions in the intervention group
children with the highrisk AL with the
most rapidly normalized in quotes that
is the most drastically affected
subjects were also the best
responders it is as if resilience itself
has a genetic core some humans are born
resilient but are less responsive to
intervention While others are born
sensitive but more likely to respond to
changes in their environment
M the idea of a resilience Gene has
entranced social engineers and so
writing in the New York Times in 2014
the behavioral psychologist J bsky
argued should we seek to identify the
most susceptible children and
disproportionately Target them when it
comes to investing very scarce
intervention and service dollars this is
J bsky continuing I believe the answer
is yes some children are I'm quoting
like delicate orchids they quickly
wither of exposed to stress and
deprivation but Blossom if they're given
a lot of care and support others are
more and again quoting like dandelions
they produce they prove more resilient
to the effects of negative effects of
adversity but at the same time don't
particularly benefit from uh uh from
positive
experiences and he writes one might have
even imagined a day when we could
genotype all children in an elementary
school to ensure that those who would
benefit the most
get help from the best
teachers so genotyping children in
elementary school foster care choices
driven by genetic profiling dandelion
and orchids evidently the conversation
around genes and predictions has already
slipped past the original boundaries of
high penetrance genes extraordinary
sufferings and justifiable intervention
to genotype driven social engineering so
here are the questions what if
genotyping identifies a child with a
future risk for unipolar depression or
bipolar disease or
schizophrenia what about gen Gene
profiling for violence or criminality or
impulsivity what constitutes
extraordinary suffering what Justice
interventions are justifiable and what
is normal are parents allowed to choose
normaly for their children what if
obeying some kind of Heisenberg and
principle of psychology the very Act of
intervention re reinforces the identity
of
abnormaly so people who have the book
this is from page 198 a memory it's 1978
or 1979 and about 88 or 9 my father has
returned from a business trip and his
bags are still in the car and a glass of
ice water is sweating on a tray in the
dining room table it's one of those
blistering afternoons in Delhi when the
ceiling fans seem to slosh heat around
the room making it feel even warmer two
of our neighbors are waiting for him in
the living room and the air seems tense
with an xiety although I'm not sure I
can discern
why my father enters the living room and
the men talk to him for a few minutes it
is I sense not a pleasant conversation
their voices rise and their words
sharpen and I can make out the Contours
of most of the sentences even through
the concrete walls of the adjacent room
where I'm supposed to be doing
homework joou my uncle has borrowed
money from them not large sums but
enough to bring them to our house
demanding repayment he has told one of
the men that he needs cash for medicines
although he's never been prescribed any
and the other man that he needs to buy a
train ticket to go visit his older
brothers there's no such trip that's
been planned you should learn to control
him says one of the men
accusingly my father listens silently
and patiently but I can feel the fury
meniscus of Rage rising in him coating
his throat with bile he walks to the
steel closet where we keep the household
cash and brings it to the men making it
a point of not bothering to count the
notes um he can spare a few x-ray rupees
they should just keep the
change by the time the men leave I know
there will be a bruising altercation at
home with the instinctual certainty of
wild animals that run uphill before
tsunamis our cook has left the kitchen
to summon my
grandmother the tension between my
father and Joo has been building for a
while his behavior at home joo's
Behavior at home has been particularly
disruptive in these last few weeks and
this episode seems to have pushed my
father over some
Edge he walks into joo's room and Yanks
him bodily off the bed and joou whales
desert like a child who's being
punished for a transgression he doesn't
understand my father is livid growing
with glowing with anger and dangerous he
shoves Joo across the room it's an
inconceivable act of violence for him
he's never lifted a finger at home my
sister runs upstairs to hide my mother
is in the kitchen crying and I watch the
scene rise to its ugly Crescendo from
behind the living room curtains as if to
as if watching a film in slow
motion and then my grandmother emerges
from the room glowering like a She Wolf
she is screaming at my father doubling
down on his violence her eyes are a
light like coals and her tongue is
forked with fire don't you dare touch
him get out she is jugu Retreats quickly
behind her I have never seen her more
formidable her Bengali furls backward
like a fuse towards its Village Origins
and I can make out some of the
words thick with accent and idiom sent
out like Airborne missiles womb wash
taint when I piece the sentence together
its poison is remarkable if you hit him
she says I will wash my womb with water
to clean your taint I will wash my
womb my f my father is also frothing
with tears now his head hangs heavily
and he's infinitely tired wash it he
says under his breath wash it clean it
wash
[Applause]
[Music]
it
he